+++
title = "Blockchain Basics"
author = ["Tulgar Dinc"]
draft = false
+++

The blockchain is a secure method of storing data based on cryptographic methods.


## The block {#the-block}

Blocks are the building **blocks** of the blockchain.
This section will discuss the use of blocks in the chain and the content of a blockchain block.


### What are blocks for {#what-are-blocks-for}

The point of a block is to store information.
For crypto currencies, this means transactions.
When someone performs a transaction, this goes out to all nodes of the blockchain.
Nodes or miners, in this case are synonymous to chain maintainers.
When this transaction is received by the maintainers, the nodes, they compile the transaction and a bunch of other transactions in to a block, which they then add to the blockchain.


### Contents of a block {#contents-of-a-block}


#### Data {#data}

Since the point of the block is to store information, they include a chunk of data.
This data in the case of Bitcoin for example is all the transactions that have been recently captured.
However the data of a block can be populated with many different types of information, not only transactions.


#### Previous hash {#previous-hash}

Each block in the chain must have some method of identification pointing to the previous block on the chain.
This is the reason, this type of data organization is called a blockchain.
Previous hash points to the block hash of the previous block on the chain.


#### Root hash {#root-hash}

Hashing is a method of identification, similar to a finger print.
It is irreversible, as of current time, which means that digital data can be converted into hash, however a hash cannot be used to identify the data that created it.
The root hash in a block is the hash generated by its data content.
In the case of Bitcoin, the root hash is generated by running the transactions trough a Merkle Tree.


#### Nonce {#nonce}

This is a number used to influence the block hash, more on this in a little bit.


#### Block hash (Block header) {#block-hash--block-header}

This is the hash generated by combining the Nonce, the Root hash and the previous hash.
The block hash points to this block, and it is the blocks signature.
It will be stored in the next block of the chain in the "previous hash" section.


## The blockchain {#the-blockchain}

The blockchain is the chain formed by the previously discussed blocks.
This section will discuss how the blockchain can remain trustworthy within a decentralized system.


### Why is it important for blocks to be chained? {#why-is-it-important-for-blocks-to-be-chained}

The chaining of the blocks together is a method of protecting the validity of the whole system.
If one tampers with the data in a block, since its block hash is generated using its data, the block hash will also change.
By storing the block hash in the next block we ensure that the block hash of the next block will also change because it is generated using the previous hash.
This will cause the entire rest of the chain to be invalidated.


### Checking validity of a chain (Proof of Work) {#checking-validity-of-a-chain--proof-of-work}

The proof of work is an important safeguard against people who form blocks creating fake data and inserting it to the chain.
For cryptocurrencies this means inserting fraudulent transactions into blocks, or tempering with already existing transactions.
In order to avoid this, blockchains have proof of work.
In order to show PoW, nodes must adjust the Nonce value in such a way, that they get an arbitrary amount of zeros in the start of their block hash.

This makes production of new blocks difficult and time intensive.
Ensuring that fraudulent blocks can not be produced rapidly.
As discussed previously, tempering with a block in the chain will cause the entire chain to be invalidated.
If it was easy to generate fraudulent blocks, the entire chain becoming invalid would not be a problem as new hash numbers would be quickly calculated.
However because PoW is required it is almost impossible to create or recalculate the hash values of the blocks.


### Which version of chain is used? {#which-version-of-chain-is-used}

Since some versions of the chain may become invalid because of tampering with a block in the chain, or by the addition of a fraudulent block, how can we decide which version of the blockchain is valid?
The blockchain nodes do this by picking the longest valid chain held on other nodes.
Nodes can hold multiple different versions of the chains at once.
For example if someone adds a fraudulent block to this node, and a non-fraudulent block comes in broadcasted by an other node, two versions of the chain is held in the node.
The chain that gets the longest is used as valid node.
Since PoW is a difficult requirement it is very hard for the fraudulent node builders to keep generating fraudulent nodes.
However because many honest nodes will be producing the correct blocks, the honest blockchain will get longer faster than the fraudulent blockchain version.
