+++
title = "Toolkit Blockchain Basics"
author = ["Tulgar Dinc"]
draft = false
+++

## Blockchain Basics {#blockchain-basics}

:ID:       77287122-1c35-4291-8dc4-03c7df667d2f

The blockchain is a secure method of storing data based on cryptographic methods.


### The block {#the-block}

Blocks are the building **blocks** of the blockchain.
This section will discuss the use of blocks in the chain and the content of a blockchain block.


#### What are blocks for {#what-are-blocks-for}

The point of a block is to store information.
For crypto currencies, this means transactions.
When someone performs a transaction, this goes out to all nodes of the blockchain.
Nodes or miners, in this case are synonymous to chain maintainers.
When this transaction is received by the maintainers, the nodes, they compile the transaction and a bunch of other transactions in to a block, which they then add to the blockchain.


#### Contents of a block {#contents-of-a-block}

<!--list-separator-->

-  Data

    Since the point of the block is to store information, they include a chunk of data.
    This data in the case of Bitcoin for example is all the transactions that have been recently captured.
    However the data of a block can be populated with many different types of information, not only transactions.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Previous hash

    Each block in the chain must have some method of identification pointing to the previous block on the chain.
    This is the reason, this type of data organization is called a blockchain.
    Previous hash points to the block hash of the previous block on the chain.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Root hash

    Hashing is a method of identification, similar to a finger print.
    It is irreversible, as of current time, which means that digital data can be converted into hash, however a hash cannot be used to identify the data that created it.
    The root hash in a block is the hash generated by its data content.
    In the case of Bitcoin, the root hash is generated by running the transactions trough a Merkle Tree.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Nonce

    This is a number used to influence the block hash, more on this in a little bit.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Block hash (Block header)

    This is the hash generated by combining the Nonce, the Root hash and the previous hash.
    The block hash points to this block, and it is the blocks signature.
    It will be stored in the next block of the chain in the "previous hash" section.


### The blockchain {#the-blockchain}

The blockchain is the chain formed by the previously discussed blocks.
This section will discuss how the blockchain can remain trustworthy within a decentralized system.


#### Why is it important for blocks to be chained? {#why-is-it-important-for-blocks-to-be-chained}

The chaining of the blocks together is a method of protecting the validity of the whole system.
If one tampers with the data in a block, since its block hash is generated using its data, the block hash will also change.
By storing the block hash in the next block we ensure that the block hash of the next block will also change because it is generated using the previous hash.
This will cause the entire rest of the chain to be invalidated.


#### Checking validity of a chain (Proof of Work) {#checking-validity-of-a-chain--proof-of-work}

The proof of work is an important safeguard against people who form blocks creating fake data and inserting it to the chain.
For cryptocurrencies this means inserting fraudulent transactions into blocks, or tempering with already existing transactions.
In order to avoid this, blockchains have proof of work.
In order to show PoW, nodes must adjust the Nonce value in such a way, that they get an arbitrary amount of zeros in the start of their block hash.

This makes production of new blocks difficult and time intensive.
Ensuring that fraudulent blocks can not be produced rapidly.
As discussed previously, tempering with a block in the chain will cause the entire chain to be invalidated.
If it was easy to generate fraudulent blocks, the entire chain becoming invalid would not be a problem as new hash numbers would be quickly calculated.
However because PoW is required it is almost impossible to create or recalculate the hash values of the blocks.


#### Which version of chain is used? {#which-version-of-chain-is-used}

Since some versions of the chain may become invalid because of tampering with a block in the chain, or by the addition of a fraudulent block, how can we decide which version of the blockchain is valid?
The blockchain nodes do this by picking the longest valid chain held on other nodes.
Nodes can hold multiple different versions of the chains at once.
For example if someone adds a fraudulent block to this node, and a non-fraudulent block comes in broadcasted by an other node, two versions of the chain is held in the node.
The chain that gets the longest is used as valid node.
Since PoW is a difficult requirement it is very hard for the fraudulent node builders to keep generating fraudulent nodes.
However because many honest nodes will be producing the correct blocks, the honest blockchain will get longer faster than the fraudulent blockchain version.


## Eat That Frog Summary {#eat-that-frog-summary}


### Summary {#summary}


#### Eat That Frog {#eat-that-frog}

> If the first thing you do each morning is to eat a live frog,
> you can go through the day with the satisfaction of knowing that that is
> probably the worst thing that is going to happen to you all day long.

Eat That Frog essentially offers a new way of living in order to fight procrastination.
This being eating the frog of the day first thing, every morning.
The frog here represents the most important task of the day that will provide the greatest
positive result. It is also often the "ugliest" task. Meaning it is hard, un-enjoyable, boring and anxiety inducing.
This frog first approach is a very powerful idea, since the frog, even though the most valuable, is the task one is most likely
to procrastinate on.


#### The 80/20 Rule {#the-80-20-rule}

20% of your tasks account for 80% of substantial results for a project/goal.
This 20% is often more difficult, perhaps more time and energy consuming.
These tasks are the frogs.
By starting with the frogs, you get the most value out of your time spent.
Tackling the bulk 80% of tasks one ends up burning through time and gets nothing done.

This is often how one procrastinates without realizing. They spend their time
working on the 80%. They expand energy and effort but get little to nothing accomplished.

> One of the very worst uses of time is to do something very well that need not be done at all.


#### Causes of Procrastination {#causes-of-procrastination}

The two major causes of procrastination:

-   **Lack of clarity**, the task is vaguely defined, making it difficult to approach.
-   **Lack of self confidence**, the task is beyond our skill level, we are less likely to approach tasks
    that we think we will fail at.


#### Tools to Fight Against Procrastination {#tools-to-fight-against-procrastination}

<!--list-separator-->

-  Planning

    Plans significantly cut down the amount of time spent during execution and provide vision/clarity.

    -   **Think on paper**. Write everything down.
    -   Plan each project/life goal carefully.
    -   Make lists of all the sub-tasks that will be required to start and finish a project/goal.
    -   Make deadlines for yourself and hold yourself accountable.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Lists for Everything

    Lists give you a starting point and a way to track your progress increasing clarity by a great deal.

    -   Make a list for the activities of today, this week, this month.
    -   Always add tasks to the task list before completing them. Always keep the list up to date.
    -   **Use the ABCDE system** to prioritize tasks
        -   _A_: tasks with concrete consequences on career/social life
        -   _B_: tasks with mild (often social consequences)
        -   _C_: tasks with little to no consequences (not related to work career)
        -   _D_: tasks that can be delegated
        -   _E_: tasks that can be eliminated/discarded
        -   Always start with A tasks
    -   Take tasks from monthly and weekly lists and add them to today as fit.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Thinking Long Term

    Long term thinking and positive visualization of who one wants to be, will make them
    motivated to complete the tasks that bring them closer to their goals.

    -   **Engage in long term thinking**. It is simply a fact of life that people who
        think long term are more likely to be successful.
    -   **Write your future goals down**. (Goals for the next 5-10 years).
    -   Visualize who you would like to be in the future and plan your tasks/goals/projects accordingly.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Overcoming Self Doubt

    Self doubt and fear of failure are great contributers to procrastination.
    Fight against your inner perfectionism.

    -   Increase your skill set. Constantly look for areas where you can improve your
        skills in the fields that you want to work on.
    -   Draft your work. **Accept that your first attempt might not be perfect**.
        Make peace with the idea of failure, but hold yourself responsible to come back
        and fix it over and over until you achieve your goals.
    -   **Just start**. The greatest resistance is often at the begging.
        Once you start, you will begin to build momentum and the task will become a lot easier.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Flow

    Flow is the king of productivity.

    -   Act fast. Move from problem to problem.
    -   **Set yourself smaller, digestible goals**, as you finish them you will build momentum.
    -   **Momentum is the key to flow**, as you complete more tasks, quickly
        entering flow will become easier.